the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
that's today's handout we have valence
bond theory and hybridization so some
people asked like okay now you're going
to tell me everything you just learned
was not really right and there's
something else that's better now all of
these theories are good theories they
all do a very good job predicting the
properties of molecules but they all
have sort of different strengths and
weaknesses and I think you know in terms
of of what they're useful for molecular
orbital Theory is very good in terms of
thinking about energy levels it's very
good about thinking about bond orders or
predicting whether something's gonna
have an unpaired electron or not valence
bond theory and hybridization are really
good in terms of thinking about shapes
of molecules so not so much about energy
levels but shapes so all of these
theories are very very useful because we
want to think about how atoms come
together to form these molecules and
what are the properties of the molecules
so these theories brought together
really give us a wonderful picture of
this and I really like valence bond
theory and hybridization because I like
shape I I determine shapes of molecules
complicated molecules for a living
so I'm a big fan but I will say that
when I taught this this is the same
lecture last year I announced to the
class that I had had a dream where all
these atomic orbitals were coming
together and trying to make other kinds
of orbitals and I realized that perhaps
that was a sign that on Friday I should
start teaching thermodynamics which is
what we're going to be doing we're gonna
start on thermodynamics on Friday and
last night I had another dream about
orbitals so I think this this is one
more some more orbitals and then we go
to thermodynamics and I remembered my
dream because at that moment my giant
dog jumped on top of me as I was
sleeping and to wake me up and realize
that thermodynamics needs to come pretty
soon okay but one one more one more
theory valence bond this this is not so
bad okay
bonds result from the pairing of
unpaired electrons from the valence
shell
atomic orbitals that's it that pretty
that's that's it so we have one we bring
in another so we can make molecular
hydrogen h2 because they each have one
unpaired electron and they come together
to form a bond
I like theories that you can say they
like that you could put on a magnet in
your refrigerator that's a good theory
to me so also as part of valence bond
Theory we have some names of bonds and
we've been talking about Sigma molecular
orbitals and PI molecular orbitals and
now we're gonna talk about Sigma bonds
and PI bonds so we had orbitals in mo
Theory valence bond Theory we now have
bonds Sigma orbital is cylindrically
symmetric about the bonding axis thank
goodness they didn't define them
differently that would have been a
nightmare so we have Sigma orbitals that
are cylindrical II symmetrical about the
bond axis and Sigma bonds are
cylindrical asymmetrical about the bond
axis so no nodal plane along the bond
axis good
I can you should we should be able to
remember that so with PI bonds we have
electron density in two lobes with a
single nodal plane along the bond axis
so again with pot with PI orbitals we
had more it wasn't so cylindrical
asymmetric so this this we should be
able to remember a couple other things
about Sigma bonds and PI bonds a single
bond is a sigma bond so when there's one
bond it's a sigma bond so what's a
double bond a double bond is a sigma
bond plus one PI bond so it's got if
it's double bond it's got two types of
bonds sigma and pi and what do you think
a triple bond is
Sigma bond and yep two pi bonds so you
got a triple bond like nitrogen got two
PI's yeah it's really a good life when
you have a triple bond all right
single bond is always going to be Sigma
double sigma and pi triple sigma and two
pi bonds okay so now we're going to
hybridize our orbitals and we're going
to talk about electron promotion as well
let's start with carbon carbon based
life carbon is really important and if
you were an organic chemist and buy
organic
it means studying things with carbon you
care a lot about hybridization and the
stuff I'm teaching you today you'll see
a lot if you go on to take organic
chemistry 512 so a carbon such as one in
methane so we have our methane molecule
here the carbon has four unpaired has
can form bonds with four electrons but
to do so we need to do something with
our electrons so carbon comes in it has
two electrons and it's 2s and it has two
electrons in its two piece T orbitals
but we want to form four bonds and in
valence bond Theory every bond you bring
an electron from one atom an electron
from the other and they pair and that
forms a bond so we don't have four
single bonds or four unpaired electrons
to make four bonds with this
configuration of electrons so we can
talk about promotion of an electron from
here up there and if we do that now we
have our four single unpaired electrons
ready to make four bonds and carbon does
like to make four bonds it does it quite
often
so that's electron promotion to form
those four bonds a 2's electron is
promoted to an empty 2p orbital and then
we can hybridize our orbitals and that
means that we want to give all our
orbitals
some s and some P character so here are
our hybrid orbitals and let me show you
the nomenclature so we're talking about
N equals 2 so we have a 2 we have s
character and we have P character and
we're using 3 P orbitals to make our
hybrid orbitals so we are going to make
a 2 sp3 hybrid orbital and we're going
to make 4 of them because we've used
four atomic orbitals to make them so if
we are using 4 we need to make 4 so
let's kind of take a look at what's
going on here
and we'll say that these molecular
orbitals differ only in terms of their
orientation in space so they don't have
different shapes they're just oriented
differently so here we have our 2s
remember it's symmetric and we have our
3p orbitals and they're all the same
except that they're all oriented
differently in space and when we bring
these together we form four hybrid
orbitals and they kind of look like
turtles
but they're Turtles oriented differently
in space but otherwise they're the same
so those are our sp3 hybridized orbitals
so carbon has this sp3 hybridized
orbital and it has four unpaired
electrons available to form bonds with
four hydrogen's so let's bring our
hydrogen's in to form our bonds and each
hydrogen brings with it its one electron
so now we have two electrons in all four
of our hybrid orbitals and we can think
about where the energy came from I just
moved that electron and think about it
like yeah that just goes up here so
where did the energy
she come from to do that and that is it
came from bonding so this molecule now
is more stable because it's bonded
methane isn't quite a stable molecule
that's another problem in and of itself
so the bonding allows you to do that you
get back from this bonding so let's look
at those bonds then that are formed that
make that electron promotion worthwhile
and so you're forming a bond between the
carbon and the hydrogen you're forming
four of them and you're forming single
bonds there's Sigma bonds and the bond
is formed between the carbons two sp3
orbital and the hydrogen's 1s orbital
hydrogen can't hybridize it's got one 1s
orbital that's all it's got can't do
anything else and that gives you a bond
than a sigma bond that you'll see this a
lot and you'll write this a lot this is
how we're going to name that sigma bond
so we're gonna say sigma we're gonna
have a parenthesis identify the element
its carbon n is two type of orbital SP 3
comma hydrogen the name of the other
element and its orbital which is one s
so when it asks you to name the type of
bond this is the complete answer that
we're looking for and we'll have more
practice on this now we can also think
about the shape that this molecule would
have what is the angle here between this
hydrogen and that hydrogen and frankly
between any of the hydrogen carbon
hydrogen's yup 109.5 and the name of
that geometry tetrahedral right so sp3
gives you a tetrahedral geometry
tetrahedral based geometry here all
right so now let's get more complicated
let's bring two carbons in so we have
ethane
two carbons six hydrogen's so this also
has its carbons are SP 3 and this is
what we saw before for methane but now
I'm going to rotate this around and
that's one carbon but we need another
carbon but first we can we can think
about this one carbon so one of the
carbons of ethane it would have this
109.5 angle it has four unpaired
electrons available in its four hybrid
orbitals to form interactions one with
carbon and three of them with hydrogen
and then we need another one of these so
we'll bring that in and it comes in with
its set of hybrid orbitals and its set
of electrons and we form a bond between
them and the bond we're going to form is
a single bond a sigma bond and now let's
bring in our hydrogen's so we had six
hydrogen's three for each carbon and so
there are now two types of bonds we have
the carbon-carbon bond and we also have
the carbon hydrogen bonds and so the
carbon-carbon bond which is a sigma bond
is sigma parenthesis carbon has carbon 2
SP 3 comma the other carbon is the same
carbon 2 SP 3 and in the bracket so
that's that Sigma bond it's a single
bond and here is our ethane molecule and
then we have our carbon hydrogen bonds
there also Sigma please don't give me PI
bonds to hydrogen
it only has that one electrons happy
with two electrons it doesn't want to do
anything complicated it doesn't have P
orbitals just that one s so Sigma carbon
2 SP 3 comma hydrogen 1s and now we have
to find this molecule so we've bought
together
two tetrahedral centers and formed this
molecule with a single bond
so let's talk about nitrogen nitrogen
also again very important so here we
have five valence electrons
what about electron promotion should I
do it yeah because I mean you could put
it up here but it can't make any more
bonds so it doesn't really matter so it
doesn't occur because it would not
increase the number of unpaired
electrons to form bonds but we can
hybridize so we can still hybridize our
orbitals and we can get four hybrid
orbitals because we're going to use our
2s and all three of our 2p orbitals so
we'll get the same set of hybrid
orbitals but this time one of them has
two electrons in it so it's not ready to
bond it's happy according to valence
bond theory and these are our lone pairs
but we have we can form three bonds with
these guys so let's look at an example
nh3 so now we have our lone pair it's in
this orbital up here and then we have
three orbitals available for bonding
each with an unpaired electron ready for
the three atoms of hydrogen to come in
so we bring in our three atoms of
hydrogen each came with an electron and
now you can tell me with a clicker about
the angle and the geometry of this
molecule
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
all right
so this is back to Vesper again so we
have an angle here it's based on an SN
for system one lone pair three bonded
atoms so it's based on our 109.5 but
those lone pairs make for bad roommates
and they're pressing all of these
hydrogen's together and so the angle is
less than 109.5 and we name the
structure based on the atoms we see not
the lone pairs so this is trigonal
pyramidal and so here we have it here so
we're naming it without thinking about
the position of those lone pairs that
are pressing down on the bond so it
looks trigonal like a triangle but it's
also a little pyramid so Vesper that's
where an hybridization that just go
right together it's awesome okay so we
can also name the type of bond so our
nitrogen had two sp3 hybridization and
our hydrogen just 1s it's a sigma bond
it's a single bond so we name that Sigma
nitrogen 2 SP 3 comma H 1 s so nitrogen
now we're going to go back to carbon and
R 2 sorry 2 oxygen and think about
hydrogen hybridization of oxygen oxygen
should I do an electron promotion now
it's not create any more electrons
available to form bonds but I can
hybridize and I can get the same four
hybrid orbitals are for two sp3 orbitals
but now two of them have two electrons
in them and two are available to form
bonds oxygen loves to form bonds with
hydrogen and form water most of the
planet is water there's a lot of water
and water is really important for life
so it's great that that oxygen and
hydrogen get along so well so the oxygen
has two lone pairs which are here you
bring in our hydrogens and they come
with one electron and again now it's
still a steric number of four systems so
it's less than 109.5 and it's actually a
lot less than the nitrogen because you
have those two lone pairs that are just
taking up so much room and squeezing
together these hydrogen atoms over here
creating this 104.5 angle and so here we
have our oxygen molecule with its two
lone pairs and it's two hydrogen's and
what's the name of that geometry bent
and again we have these polar bonds on
the created dipole so it's a polar
molecule which is very important in life
and we can name that bond it's a sigma
bond it's made up of oxygen o2 SP 3
comma H 1s alright so that's SP 3
hybridisation now let's talk about sp2
hybridization so sp2 hybridization so
back to our atomic orbitals and now
we're not gonna hybridize all of our
orbitals we're just gonna hybridize our
2s and two of our P orbitals so we'll
hybridize these guys and we will form
three hybrid orbitals and we will still
have one unhybridized orbital we will
have two P Y left alone so let's see
what this does how is this hybridization
useful so let's talk about boron boron
has three unpaired electrons but they
are not avail available right now to
form bonds according to valence bond
Theory so here we do want to do and
Tron promotion to put one of them up
here so that now all three are available
to form bonds and we can again hybridize
these three atomic orbitals and form
three hybrid orbitals so we have three
two sp2 hybrid orbitals and then we
still have our two py orbital so don't
forget to market it seems lonely it's
over here but it's going to be it's
going to be important later so don't
feel bad for it yet
alright so boron let's think about these
hybrid orbitals and how this gives us
the structure that we know occurs when
we have boron so boron now has its three
sp2 orbitals and these are going to lie
in a plane and they're gonna be as far
apart from each other as they can to
minimize electron repulsion and if
you're in a plane then you need the far
apart is you could be is 120 degrees and
this is what gives us our trigonal
planar geometry so we saw that boron
form these trigonal planar complexes
before and again they're trigonal planar
because they're like a triangle and
they're in a plane trigonal planar and
we can now bring in our hydrogen's the
hydrogen's come with an electron so we
have an electron for them and there we
have our structure we can also name that
bond so again we have single bonds so
sigma b for boron to sp2 comma
h 1s and they're three of those
carbon-carbon can also do this we talked
about carbon being sp3 carbon can also
be sp2 hybridized carbon is amazing
that's why life is based on carbon
carbon can do lots of things so again
we're going to hybridize to P orbitals
one s orbital to give three hybrid
orbitals and we have our two py
here in the corner but don't feel bad
for it it's going to do something useful
so we now have three electrons in these
hybrid orbitals and now we have one
electron in our 2p why unhybridized
orbital as well so let's see what carbon
with this kind of arrangement of
orbitals can do and again we're gonna
have trigonal planar geometry for our
two sp2 hybrid orbitals so we have
carbon there and these are all in a
plane but now coming out of the plane
toward us is this 2 P Y orbital so it's
coming out 90 degrees away from the
trigonal planar geometry so an example
of sp2 hybridization is in this molecule
c2 h4 and it has a double bond which
means if it's a double bond it has what
kind of bonds in it Sigma and hi right
so one sigma one PI bond so here now and
this is the trigonal planar geometry
it's supposed to be in a plane but you
can't really see it if it's really in a
plane but 90 degrees away from that
plane is our 2 py orbital we brought in
our two hydrogen's so this is this
carbon here is carbon is there two
hydrogen's are there this would be 120
degrees now we're gonna bring in another
one that's the one over here it comes in
with its carbon it comes in with its two
hydrogen's forming these single bond
sigma bonds between the carbon and those
hydrogen's and now we're gonna form a
carbon-carbon bond this carbon-carbon
bond is a sigma bond and so it's C 2 SP
2 comma C 2 sp2 but we're not done we
said this is a double bond so that's our
signal that's our Sigma bond but we need
our PI bond and now py our unhybridized
orbital is extremely excited because it
can form the PI bond so we form a PI
bond
and that's formed by our C 2 P Y comma C
2 P Y unhybridized orbital and we also
have 4 CH bonds and those are single
bonds those are Sigma bonds and so
they're formed by our C 2 SP 2 carbon
and hydrogen 1s and therefore of those
so that's an example of SP 2
hybridization and one thing that's very
important and here you can see what that
molecule looks like doesn't all fall
apart so this is a double bond these
model kits don't let me make double
bonds but so I have a signed double bond
and you can see the angles and the
geometry of this molecule and another
property of something with a double bond
like this is that it's not really free
to rotate so when you have these two
kind of points of attachment when you
have these orbitals forming between your
unhybridized p orbitals that does not
allow for rotation around the double
bond so if you're an organic chemist
wanting to make a molecule that's going
to be rigid if you put a lot of double
bonds in it it can't twist and turn very
well it's often very rigid which is
useful okay so we'll stop here and we'll
finish up on Friday sp2 hybridization
for the clicker question the bond over
there on that is also the same as the
one on the board but the one on the
board is written with atoms in it and it
has squiggly lines to abbreviate so make
sure that your answer is consistent with
a picture on the board as well
how're we doing okay alright let's just
take 10 more seconds remember this is a
clicker competition so we want to get
the right answer in for your recitation
all right
it's pretty good because that's the
right answer
okay so let's just take a look at this
for a minute first let me explain let's
settle down quiet down let me just
explain the diagram to because you'll be
seeing these diagrams so when you just
have a bond a line and there's no atom
indicated that means it's carbon organic
chemists I think came up with this role
carbon they just said if nothing's
indicated of course its carbon carbon is
such an important element we don't
really need to say more about it than
that so you could interpret this diagram
you have a carbon double bonded to
another carbon and then up here there's
a carbon in that ring so I just put in
this diagram carbon with squigglies
you'll see that sometimes that means
that there's more atoms there but I'm
too lazy to draw them and on this side
there's more there's a carbon but
there's more atoms there and I'm too
lazy to draw another squiggly then we
have the double bond so there's a carbon
down here as well it wasn't indicated
just the line in the drawing and you
have to predict how many hydrogen's
hydrogen's are often not indicated this
one is indicated there are other
hydrogen's in this drawing that are not
indicated you need to figure out where
they where they go and the material
we're doing now is going to help you do
that and then I also drew something in
another squiggly because I was too lazy
to draw the rest so these are different
kinds of diagrams that you'll see that
all kind of mean there's more than one
way to kind of write the same the same
structure so this particular molecule is
was used to treat schizophrenia in the
1950s and he to the usefulness of the
molecule was that double bond as we
talked about last time double bonds
restrict movement you can't twist around
the double bond and so if you had if you
had exchange and you had this group over
there and the hydrogen over here it
wouldn't be an active molecule so this
double bond fixes the
orientation of those other atoms such
that it was an active molecule and could
be used as a pharmaceutical to treat
schizophrenia so in terms of the bonds
then we have a double bond which means
we have one Sigma and one PI bond and so
the Sigma bond down here we had to know
what the hybridization was and here
those carbons are bonded to three other
atoms and so it would be sp2 carbons and
also with a double bond sp2 and then we
also have a PI bond and PI bonds are
made up of non Hydra hybridized orbitals
are py or R P X and so those are the
ones that make up the PI bond and all
the other variations some you had to two
Sigma's that's not right we have a sigma
and a PI so most people figure that out
they picked the ones that had those
categories for the most part and then
you had to pay attention to whether it
was sp2 or sp3 and then here this one is
the PI bond is not made up of hybridized
orbitals it's made up of the atomic
orbital left over so a lot to look at at
that particular problem but this is
really good practice for the exam which
is coming up a week from Monday there's
going to be lots of hybridization and
today we're going to post extra problems
for the exam so you have really a whole
week to start getting ready for this
exam and to keep up with the new
material and so extra problems in an old
exam are also going to be posted later
today all right so let's just finish
with hybridization now and this is good
because this is all stuff that's going
to be on the exam and also the
instructions for the exam are attached
to today's handouts and of course
remember no makeup exams and clicker
competition so I'm not really going to
go through anything in the instructions
it's very similar to the last time so
you can take a look at that and see the
material the material starts with the
periodic table periodic trends and goes
through the material that I'm going to
with partway through today's lecture so
at the end of hybridization that's the
end of exam 2 material so we're gonna
finish our lecture notes from last time
so pull those out and then we're going
to move on to thermodynamics so once we
hit thermodynamics that's exam 3
material so we're almost done with exam
2 material a week in advance to get
ready for the exam so that's great lots
of time to review exam 2 material and
let's see if we can have an a-average on
this exam that would make me really
really really happy I would wear my
periodic table leggings again if we
could get an A average on the exam I'm
just saying I'd be very excited ok
so we better finish up that material so
that you can get started get ready for
this so we're talking about valence bond
theory and hybridization and forming
these hybrid orbitals and valence bond
theory is this idea that and you have a
single electron in an orbital it's
available to form a bond and bonding
happens when two atoms bring together
single electrons and those pair up to
form a bond so we talked about electron
promotion before and let's just review
what that meant so if you have an empty
orbital you can promote one of your
electrons to that empty orbital and so
now we have 4 valence electrons
after electron promotion so that we have
the more possibility of forming bonds
now if you don't have an empty orbital
you can't promote your electron if you
do have an empty orbital you can promote
it more single electrons available for
bonding if you don't have an empty
orbital you there's nothing to do with
that so that's that's the trick to
electron promotion all right so now we
have one electron in our in each of the
four valence atomic orbitals that we
have for carbon but we're going to only
hybridize two of them we saw already
laughs
time that we can hybridize all four
orbitals and have sp3 we can hybridize
just three of those orbitals and have
sp2 now we're going to see that we can
hybridize just two of those orbitals and
have SP so carbon is really amazing it
can do all three of these kinds of
hybridization
that's why carbon-based life-forms are
able to exist and do so much so we're
going to now hybridize our 2 s and our 2
PZ Z is just special and so it gets to
hybridize with with with the with the
2's leaving two of the other orbitals
just by themselves so we're going to
form two hybrid orbitals
again if we hybridize two atomic
orbitals we're going to form two hybrid
orbitals and if we hybridize 2s and 2p z
we're gonna get hybrid 2 SP orbitals and
we'll have our 2px and our 2 py just the
same as always
alright so we can think about this in
terms of shapes as well so we have again
our spherical symmetric s orbitals and
our P orbitals and we have the three of
our P orbitals that are the same shape
they just different orientation in space
and so we're just going to hybridize our
to PZ and our 2s and so we'll have our
kind of funny-looking I think of them as
turtle shaped hybrid orbitals and then
we also have our 2px and 2py orbital is
the same as always
so what are we going to do with our 2's
P orbitals and our 1 2 px and 1 2 py
well we can form a pretty cool molecule
with it so we're going to form something
that has a carbon-carbon triple bond so
this is C 2 H 2 so now in cyan is the SP
orbital the hybrid orbital that is
formed on one of the on this carbon here
and then we have a
2px orbital here in the plane of the
screen and we have a 2 P watt 2py
orbital coming out toward us and of
course our 2 PZ orbital had been
hybridized with the 2s
so here we have this structure we're
gonna bring in our other carbon and the
other carbon has the same situation
going on and we can form a bond between
the two carbons with our two SP are with
our SP orbitals and we can form also
with the SP hybrid orbitals bonds to
hydrogen so we have two hydrogen's one
over here and one over there so what is
the angle between these these hydrogen's
here yeah so that's 180 and again we
have our an example here of the molecule
we're gonna build that's going to have a
triple bond so now let's talk let's name
those types of bonds or as sometimes in
a problem set it will say describe the
symmetry of the bond and what it means
by that is the following it means that
that's either say name the type of bond
or describe the symmetry there's
multiple ways to ask the question and
this is the answer to those questions so
the bond that's formed the first one
that's formed between the two carbons is
a sigma bond and it's formed between the
SP orbitals so carbon 2sp comma carbon
2sp that's the first one but this is a
triple bond so we have two more bonds to
form and this is where our atomic P X
and P Y orbitals will come in so we're
gonna form the next bond which is what a
sigma or pi PI bond and that can be
between our X px orbitals so PI carbon 2
px
, carbon 2px and now we have the two py
orbitals as well and that allows us to
form our triple bond so we're also going
to have a bond PI 2 C 2 P Y comma C 2 py
so again with a triple bond we're going
to have one Sigma and two pi bonds the
Sigma is formed from the hybrid or
orbitals and the PI bonds are formed by
the 2px and 2py orbitals so carbon
really impressive carbon can form all of
these three types of hybrid orbitals it
can form molecules with single bonds
double bonds and triple bonds so let's
just have a little cheat sheet to think
about that so again this is for carbon
hydrocarbon molecules like we've looked
at so far that have two carbons in them
so let's look at carbon in c2h6 so
that's over here what is going to be the
hybridization when you have a carbon
that has a bond to another carbon and a
bond to three hydrogen's here what
hybridization sp3 that's right and it's
gonna have what kind of a bond single
double or triple and it's gonna have
tetrahedral geometry around both of the
carbons so both of these carbons are
going to have tetrahedral geometry which
is not a blank in your note but what's
the angle 109.5 right thank you so we
have carbons c2h2 are going to be sp2
hybridized and what kind of a bond are
they gonna have between the two carbons
that'll be a double bond and what is the
geometry
right trigonal planar and here you have
to pretend this is a double bond my
model kit didn't come with double bond
possibilities and I have to hold it very
carefully but if I hold it very
carefully the bonds are still there
you'll see that the angles are 120 and
so this is trigonal planar geometry at
each carbon we didn't tape that one you
can see there's cos scotch tape all over
the others it was not a happy molecule
okay so now c2h2
what kind of hybridization that is your
friend the triple bond and we're gonna
have linear geometry and 180 so both
carbons have linear geometry that works
it's always triple bonds are much more
stable they don't fall apart as much
okay so that's a cheat sheet for carbon
now if you're thinking about nitrogen or
oxygen those often have lone pairs on
them Carbon likes to form all bonds it
doesn't care double triple single
whatever but doesn't really have a lot
of lone pairs on it but oxygen nitrogen
have lone pairs and whenever you have
lone pairs you have to worry about what
the geometry is because the geometry
gets named based on the atoms that you
do see not the lone pairs so this cheat
sheet works for carbon without lone
pairs if you have lone pairs you've got
to go back to your Vesper and think
about what the names of the geometries
are okay so rules and I posted this on
stellar for the for the problem set that
was due today and so very simple for
determining hybridization and this is
the kind of equation that will not be on
an equation sheet for an exam you just
need to know that so in determining
hybridization of of an atom in a complex
molecule you're going to be thinking
about the number of bonded atoms plus
the number of lone pairs is going to be
equal to the number of hybrid orbitals
so now clicker question what is the
hybridization of an atom that has
exactly two hybrid orbitals
all right ten seconds
yes right SP so we can take a look at
that two hybrid orbitals are formed by
one at one s orbital in one p orbital
and if you have two things bonded and no
lone pairs that's what you would get
three hybrid orbitals would be SP 2 & 4
would be SP 3 so again you're going to
just be thinking in these problems about
how many atoms are bonded to that that
central atom and how many lone pairs do
you have and that's gonna then let you
figure out what your hybridization is
and we have one exception which is that
if an atom is has a single bond and it's
terminal on the edge of the molecule
then we're not going to hybridize it so
we can now take a look at an example of
this and there are in this is going to
be another yeah just keep your clickers
out we've got a whole bunch of clicker
questions coming at you kind of in a row
here and if we have this molecule it has
a central carbon and three terminal
atoms now help me figure out what kinds
of bonds this will form so which one of
these has the correct bond types for
this molecule
all right make a decision let's just
take 10 more seconds
interesting I think sometimes my tree
poll but I think that we'll just kind of
go over this one and and then we'll want
you to want to go ahead and show the
answer and then this isn't it and if it
wasn't a clicker competition I might
have you discuss it more in repol but
it's a competition so let's go over it
so this one isn't in your notes so if
you want to write it at the bottom of
the page we'll go over what the answer
is hopefully there's not a typo in there
but we'll see when we go through all
right so let's take a look at this
molecule hydrogen is terminal and single
bonded but we've already talked about
hydrogen so we kind of knew that oxygen
is terminal but it's double bonded so we
need to hybridize it CL is terminal and
single bonded so we don't terminal eyes
we don't hybridize this and we don't
hybridize hydrogen never hybridize
hydrogen okay so let's look at the kind
of bonds that are formed so we have a
sigma bond single bond this carbon is is
carbon 2sp two it's bonded to three
different things and it has no lone
pairs so that makes it three there's
three things so we have three hybrid
orbitals which is sp2 our hydrogen is
just 1s it's always just 1s that's all
it is so let's look at this bond now so
we have a single bond between our carbon
that is two sp2 and then we also have
this oxygen we do hybridize it because
it has a double bond and it has two sets
of lone pairs and it's bonded to one
atom so it has three hybrid orbitals so
it's sp2 just like the carbon and then
we have a PI bond and the PI bond is
made up of atomic orbitals either 2px
2py chlorine is single bonded so we're
not going to hybridize it because it is
single bonded and it's terminal so it's
a single bond it's from this carbon
that's carbon 2sp 2 we already saw that
and then the chlorine is is is going to
be terminal and so it's chlorine 3p Z
and so we don't that's a non hybridized
orbital so good practice for the further
clicker I think that that one will that
one could help but we're gonna have more
practice now we're in a bunch of extra
extra problems so that one was extra now
let's do the one that is in the notes
from last time which is vitamin C so you
know give you another minute if everyone
has that that one down ok so let's look
at vitamin C so vitamin C is needed to
form collagen in your body without
enough vitamin C in your diet you could
be in trouble so it doesn't happen too
much anymore because there's vitamin
supplements and all sorts of things but
often vitamin C deficiency is associated
with sailors who went out to sea and
didn't have a healthy diet and they
became deficient in vitamin C and got
scurvy and so then they had to figure
out they had to eat oranges or other
things that were rich in vitamin C in
terms of who should be concerned about
vitamin C deficiency us primates we
don't make vitamin C so we have to get
it in our diet and also guinea pigs most
other animals make it I don't really
know why maybe this is why guinea pigs
are called guinea pigs they're good for
scurvy experiments because they don't
they don't make vitamin C all right so
let's look at this vitamin C molecule
and think about what type of moloch
and this is a clicker question so we
have to remember back more material
that's going to be on exam two does that
look like a polar or nonpolar molecule
and what's true about polar and nonpolar
molecules
all right ten more seconds
great
so it is polar and it's therefore
water-soluble and so you know that
because if there's atoms in there that
have differences of electronegativity of
greater than 0.4 carbon and oxygen of a
difference in electronegativity of
greater than 0.4 oxygen hydrogen also
electrodes electronegativity difference
is greater than 0.4 so we have a lot of
polar bonds and they're not cancelling
each other out it's not a symmetric
molecule so therefore it would be a
polar molecule and water soluble okay
great so I think you're you're good on
your polar covalent bonds which is also
going to be on exam two
all right so let's go back to
hybridization and have a little more
practice on that so don't put your
clickers away why don't you tell me the
hybridization of carbon a labeled up
here and in your notes
all right ten more seconds
all right
so we know what we we know what clicker
questions are going to determine the
winners okay so carbon a was sp3
hybridized so if we look at it over here
it has bonded to four things so there's
four which makes it sp3 okay so let's
just do the rest and you can yell these
out Carbon labeled B what kind of
hybridization for carbon B sp3 carbon C
sp3 again just want to count how many
bonds you have going on Aaron or lone
pairs but carbon doesn't usually like to
have lone pairs what about carbon d SP 2
right it only has if we look at that one
over here I'm supposed to point to this
one so carbon D over here it has 3 atoms
that it's bound to carbon e SP 2 and
carbon f SP 2 alright so now that we did
that we can use this information when we
think about the bonds that are formed
between these carbons and the other
atoms so let's look at bonding now so if
we look at carbon B 2 hydrogen that's
gonna be a sigma bond and you told me
that carbon B was sp3 so we write that
so describe the symmetry around the bond
name the bond carbon 2 SP 3 comma
hydrogen 1s we do not hybridize hydrogen
so now for the different the bond
between B and a again a sigma bond we
already looked at the fact that carbon
is b is 2 sp3 carbon a was the same now
if we look at the difference between B
and C B was carbon 2 SP 3 and then C is
also the same remember to write the twos
remember to write the hybridization
remember to write the element remember
to write Sigma for the single bond
grading these questions on the exam is
not fun you got to remember to have all
those things in there so if you get them
all in there makes everyone very happy
ok now let's look at carbon B
II to the oxygen it's also a single bond
so Sigma we know that carbon B is c2 sp3
the oxygen here is also going to be sp3
because it has two bonded atoms and two
sets of lone pairs okay one more clicker
all right ten more seconds
great yep so that is correct and if we
take a look at that over here we have
carbon D it has bonded to three things
so it's sp2 and the oxygen is bonded to
two atoms and two lone pairs so it's sp3
we can keep going and finish up between
D and C now we have sorry D and C up
here we have D which is two sp2 bonded
to three things C has bonded to four
things it's C to sp3 and then finally D
to e we have to con two bonds we have a
sigma bond so that's between our two
these two carbons here are hybridized
orbitals and again it's to sp2 to sp2
and it's double bond so we have one
Sigma and one PI bond and the PI bond is
between non hydrogen on hybridized
orbitals so it's C 2 py c 2 py or you
could have used X I don't really care
about that all right
good practice I think you're getting the
hang of this again there'll be more
practice problems on hybridization
posted today they get you ready for the
exam and also to figure out these these
bonds once you get the hang of this it's
really pretty trivial and good points
for an exam